LAL Primitive and Syntax Reference Manual
=========================================

__LAL - Lua Lisp/Scheme Compiler__

For a syntax reference I recommend looking at the Scheme specification
document R7RS (small). LAL tries to be compatible to Scheme when it
is reasonably possible.
But bear in mind, that LAL can not provide the complete spectrum
of Scheme syntax and semantics. It is a Language that is compiled
to Lua and is not wrapped into an interpretation layer.
This basically means, you lose features such as `call-with-current-continuation`,
`dynamic-wind`.

Also with regard to procedures and libraries a look at the R7RS (small) reference
may prove valuable. In any case, this reference ought to be a comprehensive
handbook for developing LAL programs, and thus at least contains a declaration
of the procedure or syntax.

The goal of LAL is to provide the same performance trade offs that
Lua comes with. LAL tries hard to add as little runtime overhead as
possible and output reasonably efficient (and __human readable__) Lua code.

This manual is automatically generated from the compiler
and LAL library sources. I'm not that fond of automatically
generated documentation, but it should serve the purpose of
a reference manual due to example code coupling the descriptions.

Important Notes about the Lua Implementation
--------------------------------------------

There are a few notes to make about the way LAL is compiled to Lua.
All LAL lists are directly converted and represented as Lua tables.
This means, you basically work with Lua tables. While this has obvious
performance benefits compared to using tables only as `cons` pairs to
form a linked list. It also comes with all the warts that Lua tables
have. First and probably the biggest one is, that you can not put a `nil`
into the list. It will just make the list end at that index.
This is probably the ugliest wart. The LAL parser internally replaces
`nil` with some sentinel value, but once it left the compiler and is
transformed into Lua code, you will have the Lua `nil` in your hands.

Next, tables also act as associative maps, which sometimes leads to confusing
results. LAL tries to hide that fact, but you will probably still stumble upon
this fact down the road.

Symbols are represented as Lua strings. This is done because Lua internalizes all
strings, so that a string comparsion is essentially an integer comparsion.
LAL represents Symbols as Lua strings that start with the character `"\xFE;"`
character number `254`. And keywords start with `"\xFD;"` (`253`).
Bear this in mind, if you get surprising results from
procedures like `(write ...)`. It also means, that if you write
`(display "\xFE;foobar")` you will get a compiletime error, because LAL can't
find the symbol `foobar` (in case you didn't `define` it).

It is a bit painful and ugly, but bear in mind that LAL comes with clear benefits
on the performance side compared to a full blown interpreter implemented in Lua.
Such an interpreter would need to represent Scheme `cons` pairs and lists as linked
lists of thos pairs. That poses a big burden on the Lua garbage collector, and
handling those lists would be quite slow too. On top of that, interaction with
Lua code becomes difficult, as you would need to transform the linked
list into a Lua table first. And then you still have to worry about the `nil` holes.

License
-------

This source code is published under the MIT License. See lal.lua or LICENSE
file for the complete copyright notice.

LAL Values and Data Types
-------------------------

LAL is inspired by Clojures sequences and maps a bit when it comes to
syntactic aspects of the language. On the other side, with regard of available
primitives, special forms and procedures it is heavily oriented on Scheme R7RS.

These are the data types that LAL provides:

### Symbols

LAL knows two kinds of symbols.
First there are the regular ones, which are mostly Scheme compatible
with regard to the reader syntax:

    a-symbol
    another_symbol
    make-me!
    lol?!

But there is a special case: Lua also has __Keywords__, which
are basically symbols that are postfixed with a colon `:`:

    a-keyword:
    alsoone:
    also-a-keyword::

These always evaluate to themself. This makes it easy to use them
as keys in maps (see below).

### Integers (exact numbers)

LAL parses integer number like these:

    -1
    +1233
    392
    49

Thes are internall converted to a Lua integer using `math.tointeger`
which Lua 5.3 provides.

### Floating Point (inexact number)

LAL parses float numbers like these:

    -1.32
    0.334
    +493.232

These are internally converted to Lua numbers using `tonumber`.

### Strings

The string reader syntax is largely compatible with Scheme R7RS small:

    "foobar hexval: \x0a;\x0d;"
    "newlines and \"quotes\" like usual: \n and tabs: \t, and so on..."

However, there is an extension that allows multiline strings
in similar fashion that Chicken Scheme provides:

    (let ((x #<<BLAFOO
        This is a
        multiline
        String! 
    BLAFOO))
        x)
    ;=>"    This is a\n    multiline\n    String!"

There is also an interpolated version available, that is
transformed into a `(str ...)` expression:

    (define x 123)
    #<#FOOBAR
        This is just a string with a ##hashtag
        You can put calculated things in like 2 + 4 = #(+ 2 4)
        And also raw identifiers can be bound: ,,#{x},,
    FOOBAR

`#{...}` exists to directly insert identifiers, which would
also be possible using `#`, but it would eat up any other characters
allowed in an identifier. To insert an `#` you have to double it like `##`.

### Lists

Lists can be written in multiple forms:

    (list 1 2 3)
    '(1 2 3)
    [1 2 3]         ; Clojure inspired syntax
                    ; syntactic sugar for: (list 1 2 3)

### Associative Maps

These are inspired a bit by Clojure and are internally represented
using Lua tables:

    { a: 10 b: 20 }
    { 'a 10 'b 20 }
    ; both maps will have the 'a' and 'b' keys set.

Symbols in a map definition are converted and stripped off their prefixes
and put as strings into the Lua table. This is makes interaction with Lua
code easier. Note that also the colon `:` of the keywords are stripped
off.
arithmetic
----------

### (+ _num-arg_+) - __procedure__

This procedure returns the sum of all _num-arg_ arguments.

    (let ((x 10)) (+ x 20)) ;=> 30


### (- _num-expr_+) - __procedure__

This procedure returns the subtration of the second argument
(and following) from the first argument.

    (- 30 20 5) ;=> 5
    (- 10 20)   ;=> -10


### (abs _num_) - __procedure__

Returns the absolute value of _num_.


### (max _num_+) - __procedure__

Returns the maximum value of all _num_ arguments.


### (min _num_+) - __procedure__

Returns the minimum value of all _num_ arguments.

compiler
--------

### (macroexpand _form_) - __syntax__

This function expands the macros found in _form_ and returns the
expanded form as quoted LAL value.

    (define-macro (head-of-syntax-list foo)
      (@0 foo))

    (lua-print
     (write-str
      (macroexpand
       (head-of-syntax-list
        ((let (x a) x) 2 3)))))
    ;stdout=>(let (x a) x)


control
-------

### (apply _proc_ [_arg1_ ... _argN_] [...]) - __procedure__

Calls _proc_ with the elements of the appended lists as argument.

    (apply str-join "," ["X" "Y"]) ;=> "X,Y"

controlflow
-----------

### (block _label-symbol_ _sequence_) - __syntax__

This syntax allows to break out of loops in conjunction with `(return-from ...)`.
It internally binds the _label-symbol_ for `return-from` to refer to.
When `return-from` is called the execution continues after the `block` expression
with the return value given to `return-from`.

    (block outer
        (for (i 1 10)
            (when (= i 5)
                (return-from outer 99)))
        20)
    ;=> 99

Please note, that the internal binding of _label-symbol_ is dynamic and not
lexically scoped. This means, you can not use it in a lambda closure to jump
up/down the call stack. LAL does not support continuations. (You can however
use the coroutine capabilities provided by Lua).



### (case _key-value_ ((_datum_ ...) _result_) ...) - __syntax__

Alternative forms:

* (case ((_datum_ ...) _result_) ... (else _result_))
* (case ((_datum_ ...) _result_) ... (else => _result_))

This is a dispatch based on the `eqv?` operator. _key-value_ is evaluated
and the result is compared against each _datum_ of the `case` clauses.
The matching clause _result_ is evaluated then and it's value returned.
Alternatively there is the `else` branch, which is executed when nothing
matches.
If a `=>` is present in the _result_ of a `case` branch or `else`,
then the _result_ should evaluated to a function, which is then called
with the _key-value_ as argument.


### (cond (_condition-expr_ _result_) ...) - __syntax__

* (cond (_condition-expr_ _result_) ... (else _result_))

Simple multi-if statement that tests multiple _condition-expr_ and then
evaluated the corresponding _result_.
If there is an `else` branch, the branch will be evaluated when no condition
evaluates to `#t`.

    (cond ((> 3 2) 'greater)
          ((< 3 2) 'less))
    ;=> greater

    (cond ((> 3 3) 'greater)
          ((< 3 3) 'less)
          (else 'equal))
    ;=> equal


### (if _condition-expr_ [_true-branch_ [_false-branch_] ]) - __syntax__

The most basic control flow operation. If _condition-expr_ evaluates to a
true value the _true-branch_ is evaluated. Otherwise the _false-branch_ is
evaluated if it is present.

    (if #t 10 20) ;=> 10
    (if #f 10 20) ;=> 20
    (if #t 10)    ;=> 10
    (if #f 10)    ;=> nil
    (if #t)       ;=> nil
    (if #f)       ;=> nil

    (let ((x 100))
      (if (> x 50)
        (set! x 11))
      x)
    ;=> 11


### (return-from _label-symbol_ _expression_) - __syntax__

This syntax is to be used in conjunction with `(block ...)`.
It returns the value of _expression_ from the corresponding `block`.

    (block break
        (for (i 1 10000)
            (when (is-done? i)
                (return-from break i))))


### (when _condition-expr_ _block_) - __syntax__

When _condition-expr_ evaluates to a false value, the _block_ is executed.

    (let ((something 1))
      (unless (zero? something)
        (display "Something is zero!")
        (set! something 0))
      something)
    ;=>0


### (when _condition-expr_ _block_) - __syntax__

When _condition-expr_ evaluates to a non false (true) value,
the _block_ is executed.

    (let ((something 0))
      (when (zero? something)
        (display "Something is zero!")
        (set! something 1))
      something)
    ;=>1

environment
-----------

### (import _import-spec_+) - __syntax__

Where _import-spec_ may be one of:

* _library-name_    - A list of identifiers and numbers

	(import	(lua basic))
	(import	(lua math))

	(lua-print (lua-math-floor 3.2))
	;stdout=> 3

Following (builtin) libraries are available:

* `(lua string)`
* `(lua math)`
* `(lua table)`
* `(lua package)`
* `(lua debug)`
* `(lua io)`
* `(lua utf8)`
* `(lua basic)`

See the Lua documentation for the contents of the
corresponding packages. The __(lua basic)__ package
is a special case. The contents of it is not
prefixed with `lua-basic` but directly with `lua-`.

When LAL is run within LALRT, it provides the
LALRT specific packages under the `rt` libraries:

* `(rt log)`
* `(rt utl)`
* `(rt gfx)`
* `(rt sys)`
* `(rt mp)`
* ...

Imported symbols from any of those libraries are prefixed with
their respective package name, like `mp-wait`.

Please note, that these packages (`rt`) are only meaningful inside LALRT,
other runtime environments probably provide other globally
accessible packages.

exceptions
----------

### (error _msg_ _value_*) - __procedure__

This procedure works like `(raise ...)`, but it packs _msg_ and
any _value_ values into an error object which is then thrown.
You can detect error objects using `(error-object? ...)`
and catch then using `(with-exception-handler ...)` or `(guard ...)`.

    (with-exception-handler
        (lambda (err)
            (if (error-object? err)
                (display (error-object-message err))
                (display err)))
        (lambda ()
            (error "Something is wrong!" 193)))
    ;stdout=> Something is wrong!


### (error-object-irritants _value_) - __procedure__

If _value_ is an error object that was thrown using `(error ...)`
this procedure returns the irritants or values that were passed.

    (with-exception-handler
        (lambda (err)
            (if (error-object? err)
                (error-object-irritants err)
                err))
        (lambda ()
            (error "Something is wrong!" 193)))
    ;=>(193)


### (error-object-message _value_) - __procedure__

If _value_ is an error object that was thrown using `(error ...)`
this procedure returns the message.


### (error-object? _value_) - __procedure__

Returns true if _value_ was created using `(error ...)`.

    (with-exception-handler
        (lambda (err)
            (if (error-object? err)
                (display (error-object-message err))
                (display err)))
        (lambda ()
            (error "Something is wrong!" 193)))
    ;stdout=> Something is wrong!


### (raise _error-value_) - __procedure__

With this procedure you can throw errors using the Lua exception mechanism.
_error-value_ is usually a string that describes the error. But it can also
be something else of course.

    (with-exception-handler
      (lambda (err) (display (str :Exception ": " err)))
      (lambda ()
        (when (zero? 0)
              (raise "Something is weird!"))))
    ;stdout=> Exception: Something is weird!

See also `(error ...)`, `(with-exception-handler ...)` and `(guard ...)`


### (with-exception-handler _handler-func_ _func_) - __procedure__

Executes _func_ and catches any exception that was emitted using `(raise _value_)`
_handler-func_ is then executed using the _value_ passed to `raise`.

Please note, that no `(raise-continuable ...)` is available, due to
limitations of Lua exceptions.

    (with-exception-handler
        (lambda (err) err)
        (lambda ()
            (raise 42)
            99)) ;=> 42

See also `(error ...)`, `(raise ...)` and `(guard ...)`.

interop
-------

### (. _method-symbol_ _object-value_ _arg-expr_*) - __syntax__

This special syntax allows you to use the Lua method call syntax.
It is basically a shorthand for: `(($_method-symbol_ _object-value_) _arg-expr_*)`
and is compiled a bit more neatly down to Lua.
You may use it if you ever get some Lua object returned or you want to define your own.

	(import (lua basic))

	(let ((obj { :print_hello
			     (lambda (astr) (lua-print "Hello World! " astr)) }))
		(.print_hello obj "Welcome!"))
		; Generated Lua:  obj.print_hello("Welcome!")

	;stdout=> Hello World! Welcome!

The syntax is inspired from Clojure. Please be aware, that if you use
keywords like `print_hello:` the `:` is removed from the symbol before
it is used as map key.


### (.. _method-symbol_ _object-value_ _arg-expr_*) - __procedure__

This is equivalent to `(. _method-symbol_ _object-value_ _arg-expr_*)` but
it calls the method _method-symbol_ using the `:` Lua syntax. This passes
the object table as first argument to the function.

	(import (lua basic))

	(let ((obj { :print_hello
				 (lambda (self, astr) (lua-print "Hello World! " astr)) }))
		(..print_hello obj "Welcome!"))
		; Generated Lua:  obj:print_hello("Welcome!")
		; Equivalent to:  obj.print_hello(obj, "Welcome!")

	;stdout=> Hello World! Welcome!

io
--

### (display _value_ [_port_]) - __procedure__

This procedure prints a human readable representation of _value_.
In case of _value_ being a string, the string is printed directly.
Other values will be printed as if passed to `write`.

_port_ may be any Lua filehandle (for example `lua-io-stdout`)
or the result of `(open-output-string)`.

    (display "Hello World!") ;stdout=> Hello World!
    (display '(1 2 3 x))     ;stdout=> (1 2 3 x)

    (begin
        (import lua-io)
        (display '(foo bar) lua-io-stderr))


### (displayln _value_ [_port_]) - __procedure__

Same as `display`, but with an additional `newline` afterwards.


### (get-output-string _port_) - __procedure__

This method returns the complete output that was written to _port_.
_port_ must be the return value of `(open-output-string)`.

Alternatively you may pass a list, which is then concatenated
and the string of that is returned.

    (let ((out (open-output-string)))
        (display '(x "foobar") out)
        (get-output-string out))
    ;=> "(x foobar)"

    (let ((out []))
        (display '(x "foobar") out)
        (get-output-string out))
    ;=> "(x foobar)"


### (newline [_port_]) - __procedure__

This procedure writes an end of line to the _port_.
See also `(display)`.

    (begin
      (display "Hello World!")
      (newline) ;stdout=> Hello World!\n


### (open-output-string) - __procedure__

Creates an output port for use everywhere in LAL where a _port_
is required. (See also `(display ...)` or `(write ...)` for example).

Inplace of a _port_ you can always pass a list (Lua table)
that will be modified by the output procedures.

    (let ((out (open-output-string)))
        (display '(x "foobar") out)
        (get-output-string out))
    ;=> "xfoobar"

    (let ((out []))
        (display '(x "foobar") out)
        (get-output-string out))
    ;=> "xfoobar"


### (write _value_ [_port_]) - __procedure__

This procedure prints a serialized representation of _value_, that
can be read using `read` or `read-str` later.

_port_ may be any Lua filehandle (for example `lua-io-stdout`)
or the result of `(open-output-string)`.

    (write "Hello World!") ;stdout=> "Hello World!"
    (write '(1 2 3 x))     ;stdout=> (1 2 3 x)

    (begin
        (import lua-io)
        (write '(foo bar) lua-io-stderr))


### (writeln _value_ [_port_]) - __procedure__

Same as `write`, but with an additional `newline` afterwards.

iterative
---------

### (do-each (_key-sym_ _value-sym_ _map-expr_) _sequence_) - __syntax__

Iterates over the value of _map-expr_, binding the variables _key-sym_ and _value-sym_ to the
corresponding key/value pair and executing _sequence_ for each pair.

    (let ((keys []) (vals []))
        (do-each (k v { :a 10 :b 20 :c 30 })
            (push! keys k)
            (push! vals v))
        keys)
    ;=> (:a :b :c)


### (do-each (_val-sym_ _list-expr_) _sequence_) - __syntax__

Iterates over the value of _list-expr_, binding the variable _val-sym_ to the
current item of the list and executing _sequence_ for each item.

    (let ((non-zero-vals []))
        (do-each (v [ 0 322 0 493 0 12 212 3 40 ])
            (when (not (zero? v))
                (push! non-zero-vals v)))
        non-zero-vals)
    ;=> (322 493 12 212 3 40)


### (for (_count-var-symbol_ _start-idx_ _end-idx_ [_increment-num_]) _sequence_) - __syntax__

This form represents a simple counting loop. It counts by _increment-num_ from _start-idx_
until _end-idx_ is reached. The index is bound to _count-var-symbol_.

    (let ((nums []))
      (for (i 0 4)
        (push! nums i))
      nums)
    ;=> (0 1 2 3 4)

lists
-----

### (cons _item-value_ _list-value_) - __procedure__

Forms a new list that contains _item-value_ followed by
the contents of _list-value_. It does a shallow copy of _list-value_.

    (cons 'a ['b 'c]) ;=> (a b c)


### (cons! _item-value_ _list-value_) - __procedure__

This prepends _item-value_ to _list-value_ by mutating the _list-value_.

    (let ((l ['b 'c]))
      (cons! 'a l)
      l)
    ;=> (a b c)


### (for-each _function_ _list_+) - __procedure__

This procedure calls _function_ for each item in the _list_.
If multiple lists are passed, the _function_ is called with as many arguments
as there are lists.
The _function_ is called as long as there is still an item in any of the lists.

In contrast to `map` this function does not collect the returned values
and only executed _function_ purely for it's side effects.

    (let ((sum 0))
        (for-each (lambda (x)
                (set! sum (+ sum x)))
             '(1 2 3 4)))
    ;=> 10

    (let ((out []))
      (for-each (lambda (a b) (append! out [a b])) '(1 2) '(x y))
      out)
    ;=> (1 x 2 y)


### (length _list-arg_) - __procedure__

Returns the length/number of items in _list-arg_.
Be aware that Lua tables can't have holes that contain `nil`.


### (list _arg_+) - __procedure__

Returns a new list containing the values of the arguments.

    (list 1 2 3 4)   ;=> (1 2 3 4)
    (list 1 'x 3 4)  ;=> (1 x 3 4)


### (list-ref _list_ _index_) - __procedure__

Returns the element at _index_ in _list_.

    (list-ref [1 :lol 3] 1) ;=> :lol



### (list-set! _list_ _index_ _value_) - __procedure__

Assigns _value_ to _index_ in _list_.

    (let ((l [4 5 6]))
      (list-set! l 3 7)
      l)
    ;=> (4 5 6 7)



### (map _function_ _list_+) - __procedure__

This procedure calls _function_ for each item in the _list_.
If multiple lists are passed, the _function_ is called with as many arguments
as there are lists.
The _function_ is called as long as there is still an item in any of the lists.

The return values of the _function_ are collected in a new list that
is returned.

    (let ((sum 0))
        (map (lambda (x)
                (set! sum (+ sum x)))
             '(1 2 3 4)))
    ;=> (1 3 6 10)

    (map (lambda (a b) [a b]) '(1 2) '(x y))
    ;=> ((1 x) (2 y))


### (nil? _value_) - __procedure__

Returns true if _value_ is the `nil` value.
And only then.

    (nil?   nil)     ;=> #t
    (nil?   [])      ;=> #f
    (nil?   '())     ;=> #f
    (nil?   {})      ;=> #f
    (nil?   0)       ;=> #f
    (nil?   "")      ;=> #f


### (pop! _list_ [_num_]) - __procedure__

Removes the last _num_ elements (at least 1 if _num_ is not given)
from _list_ and returns it.

    (let ((l [8 9 10]))
      (pop! l)  ;=> 10
      (pop! l)  ;=> 9
      (pop! l)) ;=> 8


### (push! _list_ _value_) - __procedure__

Appends the _value_ to the end of _list_.

scope
-----

### (define (_symbol_ [_parameters_]) _sequence_) - __syntax__

Binds the _symbol_ inside the current lexical scope to a function.
It's syntactic sugar for:

    (define _symbol_
        (lambda ([_parameters_]) _sequence_))

To define the equivalent of `(lambda arglist ...)` use
`(define (funcname . arglist) ...)`.


### (define _symbol_ _expression_) - __syntax__

Binds the _symbol_ inside the current lexical scope to the
evaluated value of _expression_.

    (let ((x 10))
        (define y 30)
        (+ x y))
    ;=> 40


### (define-global _symbol_ [_value_]) - __syntax__

Defines a global variable _symbol_. And optionally assigns _value_.

    (begin
        (let ((x 10))
            (define-global y (* x 2)))
        y)
    ;=> 20

strings
-------

### (str _value_*) - __procedure__

This is a shorthand for `(str-join "" _value_*)`.
It basically creates a human readable representation of each value
in string form like `(display ...)` would do and concatenates the
values.

    (let ((x (+ 1 2 3)))
        (str "foo" 123  x)) ;=> "foo1236"


### (str-join _separator_ _value_*) - __procedure__

This procedure converts all _value_ arguments to a string using
the same internal procedure that `(display ...)` uses to convert
LAL values to strings. This means: strings, symbols, keywords, lists and
maps are converted into a human readable form. Strings are directly
inserted without a change, except when they are prefixed with
a symbol char `"\xFE"` or a keyword char `"\xFD"`.

    (str-join "," "one word" another-word: 'and-a-symbol '(1 2 3))
    ;=>"one word,another-word,and-a-symbol,(1 2 3)"

If you need the Lua equivalent, you are free to `(import (lua table))`
and use `(lua-table-concat ["\xFE;123" "foobar"] ",")`:

    (begin
        (import (lua table))
        (lua-table-concat [(quote "\xFE;123") "foobar"] ","))
    ;=>123,foobar   ; notice, that we don't have quotes. Thats because the
                    ; LAL printer recognizes Lua strings that start with "\xFE"
                    ; as symbols.

symbols
-------

### (keyword->string _sym-value_) - __procedure__

This procedure converts the keyword _sym-value_ to a string.
On symbols this procedure does the same as `symbol->string`.

    (keyword->string foo:)  ;=> "foo"


### (keyword? _value_) - __procedure__

Returns true if _value_ is a keyword. A keyword in LAL is a special form
of symbols, which always evaluate to themself. Any symbol that ends with
a colon `:` is a keyword.

(On the Lua side these are represented by a "\xFD" prefixed string.)

    (keyword? 'foobar)      ;=> false
    (keyword? foobar:)      ;=> true
    (keyword? "foobar")     ;=> false
    (keyword? "\xFElol")    ;=> false
    (keyword? "\xFDlol")    ;=> true


### (string->keyword _string-value_) - __procedure__

This procedure converts the _string-value_ into a keyword.

    (string->keyword "foo")     ;=> foo:
    (string->keyword "foo-bar") ;=> foo-bar:


### (string->symbol _string-value_) - __procedure__

This procedure converts the _string-value_ into a symbol.
This might be useful for matching certain symbols or writing macros.

    (string->symbol "foo-bar") ;=> foo-bar


### (symbol->string _sym-value_) - __procedure__

This procedure converts the symbol _sym-value_ to a string.

    (symbol->string 'x->y) ;=> "x->y"


### (symbol? _value_) - __procedure__

Returns true if _value_ is a symbol. A symbol is represented
as string that is prefixed with a `"\xFE"` character on the Lua
side.

Please note, that also a keyword is a symbol.

    (symbol? 'foobar)      ;=> true
    (symbol? foobar:)      ;=> false
    (symbol? "foobar")     ;=> false
    (symbol? "\xFElol:")   ;=> true
    (symbol? "\xFDlol")    ;=> false
    (symbol? "\xFEabc")    ;=> true


syntax-compiler
---------------

### (current-source-pos) - __syntax__

Returns a string that identifies the current position in the source code.
Example:

    (import (lal syntax-compiler))

    (begin
         (display A:)
         (display (lal-syntax-compiler-current-source-pos))
         (display B:))


### (debug-print-output) - __syntax__

This method sets a flag in the compiler, so that it will print out the generated
Lua code after compilation together with the line and file in which this
form is used.

    (import (lal syntax-compiler))

    (begin
         (displayln A:)
         (lal-syntax-compiler-debug-print-output)
         (displayln B:))

    ;stdout=>
        DEBUG-PRINT-OUTPUT testdeb.lal:5> [
        if (os.getenv("LALRT_LIB")) then package.path = package.path .. ";" .. os.getenv("LALRT_LIB") .. '/lal/?.lua'; end
        ;
        local _ENV = { _lal_lua_base_ENV = _ENV, _lal_lua_base_pairs = pairs };
        for k, v in _lal_lua_base_pairs(_lal_lua_base_ENV) do _ENV["_lal_lua_base_" .. k] = v end;
        local _lal_req1 = _lal_lua_base_require 'lal.lang.builtins';
        local strip_kw = _lal_req1["strip-kw"];
        local strip_sym = _lal_req1["strip-sym"];
        local display = _lal_req1["display"];
        --[[testdeb.lal:1] ]
        --[[testdeb.lal:3] ]
        --[[testdeb.lal:4] ]
        display("\xFDA");
        return display("\xFDB");
        --[[testdeb.lal:1] ]
        ]

Please note, that the actual output is compiler dependent and may differs
between versions.


### (display-compile-output [_tag_] _expression_) - __syntax__

This syntax will print out the compilation output of _expression_ to
standard output. It will be marked using _tag_. This form is very handy for
debugging problems in the code generation and/or the compiler itself.

    (import (lal syntax-compiler))
    (lal-syntax-compiler-display-compile-output "test out" (+ 10 20))
    ;stdout=> LAL-COMPILE-OUT[test out] CHUNK{{{
    ;         }}} VALUE[expr:unknown:nil:returning]{{{ (10 + 20) }}}

A __CHUNK__ contains usually only code that has side effects and does not directly
provide a value for the next expression which uses the value of the currently compiled
expression. The __VALUE__ is the actual Lua code that returns an expression.
This can be a full expression like `(10 + 20)` or also a function like
`function (a, b) ... end`. Often it is just some temporary variable name that
was declared in/before the __CHUNK__.

Meaning of the fields in `[ ... ]`:
    expression-type         - type of the expression, used by the code generator
                              to determine how to handle the VALUE of the chunk.
                              Lua does make a difference between statements and expressions,
                              so we need to explictly assign some expressions
                              to some temporary if the VALUE has sideeffects.
                              Types:
                                "sideeffectFree"
                                "expr"
                                "stmt"
    compile-type            - the type of the value returned by the generated code
                              generator node. Used for primitive data literals
                              to apply some optimizations. For example when accessing
                              fields in tables. Some possible values:
                                "string"
                                "number"
                                "boolean"
                                "keyword"
                                "symbol"
                                "nil"
    raw-string-val          - the raw value as string. useful in case some optimizations
                              based on compile-type are done. Usually only filled for
                              "keyword", "symbol" or "string".
    is-returning            - shows "returning" if the expression is located in a
                              returning branch or whether it actually returns due to
                              a `(return ...)`. This helps the LAL compiler to eliminate
                              dead code after a return, so that the Lua compiler
                              does not complain.

sys-util
--------

### (sys-proc-spawn-lal _lal-code-string_ _lal-code-name_) - __procedure__

This procedure works analog to `proc-spawn` and adds some prelude
code for running LAL code in a new thread. All communication with that
LAL thread works using the message passing API `mp-send` `mp-wait`.

Example:

    ---- test.lal ------
    (import (rt mp))
    (displayln "FOOOABBB")
    { main: (lambda ()
              (displayln MAIN-PROC:)
              (mp-send end:)) }
    ---- END test.lal ----

    (import (rt mp))
    (import (rt proc))
    (import (sys proc))

    (let ((p (sys-proc-spawn-lal #<LAL
        (begin
          (import (rt mp))
          (import (test))
          (test-main))
    LAL "XX")))
      (mp-wait-infinite end:))

    (displayln ENDEND:)

values
------

### (= _value-a_ _value-b_ _value-x_*) - __procedure__

Compares all arguments, and returns true if they are equal in the
sense of `(eqv? ...)`. In Scheme this procedure only works on numbers,
but Lua doesn't have special number comparation operators, so we just
use the Lua `==`.


### (eq? _value-a_ _value-b_) - __procedure__

This procedure is the same as `(eqv? ...)` in LAL
and not more fine grained than in Scheme.


### (equal? _value-a_ _value-b_) - __procedure__

Compares the two values _value-a_ and _value-b_ structurally.
This means, for structured values like lists or maps it does a recursive
comparsion. And for all other values, it returns what `(eqv? _value-a_ _value-b_)`
would return.

    (equal? '((a b) { :x 10 }) '((a b) { :x 10 })) ;=> #true

Please note that `equal?` returns false once it hits a cycle in any of the
values. Thats not perfect, but at least it will terminate.  This is a
difference to R7RS Scheme, which requires `equal?` to compare the data
structures even with cycles correctly.
(R5RS did not even require it to terminate.)


### (eqv? _value-a_ _value-b_) - __procedure__

This procedure compares _value-a_ and _value-b_ using
the `==` operator from Lua. It basically returns true,
when the value's types are equal and their actual values are
equal. Only lists or maps that are stored in the same memory
location are equal.


### (quasiquote _value_) reader-syntax: ````_value_ - __syntax__

This is LALs quasiquotation. It quotes the _value_ in such a way,
that it evaluates to itself. If the _value_ is a list, then the
special quasiquote syntaxes `(unquote ...)` and `(unquote-splicing ...)`
are evaluated and expanded properly.

This syntax is usually very helpful when defining macros with `(define-macro ...)`:

    (define-macro (macro-add a b)
        `(+ ,a ,@b))
	(macro-add 30 (1 3 4 5)) ;=> 43


### (quote _value_) reader-syntax: '_value_ - __syntax__

Quotes the _value_ in that way, that it evaluates to itself:

    (symbol->string 'a)     ;=> "a"
    '(a b c d)              ;=> (a b c d)
    ['a 'b 'c 'd]           ;=> (a b c d)


### (read-str _string_) - __procedure__

This procedure parses the _string_ and returns the value as LAL data structure.
This procedure basically calls into the LAL parser to read the LAL value.
It is meant to use in conjunction with the `write` procedure and
can be useful for storing data structures in files.

    (let ((somelist (read-str "(1 2 3 4 test)")))
      somelist)
    ;=>(1 2 3 4 test)



### (unquote _value_) reader-syntax: ,_value_ - __syntax__

Useful only inside a quasiquotation. It unquotes the _value_ and
inserts the evaluated value inside the quasioquoted result.

	`(1 2 ,(+ 1 2)) ;=> (1 2 3)


### (unquote-splicing _value_) reader-syntax: ,@_value_ - __syntax__

Useful only insode a quasiquotation. It unquotes the _value_,
evaluates it, and inserts the value into the quasiquoted list.
If the _value_ evaluates to a list, the items are directly
inserted into the resulting list.

	`(1 2 ,@(list 3 4)) ;=> (1 2 3 4)

Compared with `(unquote ...)`:

	`(1 2 ,(list 3 4))  ;=> (1 2 (3 4))


### (write-str _value_) - __procedure__

This procedure serializes the value it gets as it's first argument
and returns a string representation of it.
The syntax is compatible with the LAL parser and the `read-str` procedure.

    (let ((somelist [1 2 3 [1 2 3] ])
          (clone (read-str (write-str somelist))))
      clone)
    ;=> [1 2 3 [1 2 3] ]

LALRT Specific Packages
=======================

http
----

(import (rt http))

### (http-bind _port-number_) - __procedure__

Binds a HTTP server to the TCP _port-number_.
Returns a token, that can be used for waiting on new requests.
If there is an error, an exception will be thrown.

    (let ((f (http-bind 18099)))
      (do ((req (mp-wait f) (mp-wait f)))
          (#t #t)
        (let ((handle (@1 f)))
          (http-response
           handle   ; srv-handle
           (@1 req) ; req-token
           { :action :json :data { :x 1 :y 2 } }))))


### (http-free _server-handle_) - __procedure__

Frees the HTTP-Server handle.


### (http-get _url_ _options_) - __procedure__

A very simple HTTP GET implementation that returns a data structure
containing the response. And conveniently decodes JSON based on the
Content-Type of the response.
Throws an exception if an error occured.
_options_ is a map that can contain following items:

    {cookies:  _map-of-cookie-names-and-values_}

    (let ((resp (http-get "http://localhost/test.json")))
      (display (str "Status/Reason:" ($:status resp) ($:reason resp)))
      (display (str "Got JSON:" (write-str ($:data resp))))
      (display (str "Body:" ($:body resp))))


### (http-response _server-handle_ _request-token_ _response-data_) - __procedure__

Sends the _response-data_ back to the _server-handler_.
_response-data_ should be a map, that should provide the `:action` key
to set the kind of response.
Throws an exception if an error occured (for example, when replying to a
request twice).
This is a possible map:

    { :action :json :data some-data-structure }
    { :action :file :path "webdata/index.html" } ; content-type is automatically generated
    { :action :file :path "webdata/index.html" :contenttype "text/html; charset=utf-8" }
    { :action :data :data "foobar" :contenttype "text/plain; charset=utf-8" }


For an example see `http-bind`

lal
---

(import (rt lal))

### (lal-dump _data_) - __procedure__

Returns a serialized form of _data_ as LAL-Datastructure.

mp
--

(import (rt mp))

### (mp-add-default-handler _priority-num_ _callback-function_) - __procedure__

@mp procedure (mp-add-default-handler _callback-function_)

Installs the _callback-function_ as default handler for any unhandled
messages to the current process/port.
The numeric value of _priority-num_ decides the order in which the default handlers
are called. Where lower means earlier, and higher means later. Default should be 0.


### (mp-check-available _token-string_) - __procedure__

`mp-check-available` returns immediately after checking for matching messages.
The _token-string_ or the elements of the _token-string-list_ are matched
against the third element of the message if the message is a list.
If the message is a map, it's matched against the `:command` key.
You can use `nil` or the empty string "*" token as catch all token,
to receive any message.

See also `mp-wait-infinite` and `mp-wait`

   (begin
       (proc-spawn "(mp-send [foo: 123])")
       (let ((m (mp-check-available foo:)))
           (when m (@1 m)))) ;=> 123 or nil if none available


### (mp-remove-default-handler _token_) - __procedure__

Uninstalls the default handler with the given _token_.
The _token_ is returned by `mp-add-default-handler` upon registration ofa default handler.


### (mp-send _pid-number_ _message-data_) - __procedure__

@mp procedure (mp-send _message-data_)

Sends the _message-data_ to the process with _pid-number_ and
returns the unique token of the message (see also `mp-wait`).
If _pid-number_ is omitted, the message is directly emitted to
the parent process.

    (let ((f (mp-send 0 [ping:]))
          (r (mp-wait-infinite f)))
      (assert (eq? (.result r) pong:)))


### (mp-set-debug-logging _bool_) - __procedure__

Enables/Disables extensive message logging of the current process.


### (mp-token) - __procedure__

Returns a new token, that can be passed to various functions to
have a unqiue value that can be used to register callbacks or waiting
points for (mp-redirect) or (mp-wait)


### (mp-wait _token-string_ _wait-ms_) - __procedure__

Waits for a message to arrive in the time [_wait-ms_] milliseconds.
The _token-string_ or the elements of the _token-string-list_ are matched
against the third element of the message if the message is a list.
If the message is a map, it's matched against the `:command` key.
You can use `nil` or the empty string "*" token as catch all token,
to receive any message.

There are two types of layouts for messages:
    - list: (<source pid> <unique token> <message command> <arg>*)
    - map: { :command <message command> :pid <source pid> :token <unique token> }
The <unique token> and the <source pid> can be used to reply to a message
if the sender expects this.

See also `mp-wait-infinite` and `mp-check-available`.

   (begin
       (proc-spawn "(mp-send [foo: 123])")
       (let ((m (mp-wait foo: 1000)))
           (@1 m))) ;=> 123


### (mp-wait-infinite _token-string_) - __procedure__

`mp-wait-infinite` waits infinitely until a message arrived.The _token-string_ or the elements of the _token-string-list_ are matched
against the third element of the message if the message is a list.
If the message is a map, it's matched against the `:command` key.
You can use `nil` or the empty string "*" token as catch all token,
to receive any message.

There are two types of layouts for messages:
    - list: (<source pid> <unique token> <message command> <arg>*)
    - map: { :command <message command> :pid <source pid> :token <unique token> }
The <unique token> and the <source pid> can be used to reply to a message
if the sender expects this.

   (begin
       (proc-spawn "(mp-send [foo: 123])")
       (let ((m (mp-wait-infinite foo:)))
           (@1 m))) ;=> 123

proc
----

(import (rt proc))

### (proc-pid) - __procedure__

Returns the internal process/port ID of this thread.
This will be 0 for the main thread.

    (proc-pid) ;=> 0 ; for main/first process/port


### (proc-spawn _init-program-text_ [_args-data_]) - __procecdure__

Creates a new process with the init program text _init-program-text_.
The started init programm is _args-data_ passed as arguments.
Returns the `pid` of the newly created process.

    (let ((p (proc-spawn "(mp-send [foobar:])")))
      (mp-wait foobar:))


### (proc-terminated?) - __procedure__

Returns `#true` if thread should stop processing and terminate itself.

    (do () ((not (proc-terminated)) nil)
      #;(do iterative thread stuff here))

qt
--

### (qt-delete _object_) - __procedure__

Deletes/Destroys an object/pointer that was created using the
qt-* API.

   (let ((le (qt-line-edit-create ...)))
     ...
     (qt-delete le))


### (qt-exec [_init-cb_]) - __procedure__

Start the Qt event loop.
_init-cb_ can be a callback or a message, which will be emitted to
the current process (and this message can be received using a default.
handler for messages)

   (begin
     ; Send a message to yourself (proc-pid), it will be called by
     ; the Qt event loop in (qt-exec).
     (mp-send (proc-pid) [after-init:])
     (mp-add-default-handler
      (lambda (msg)
        (when (eqv? (@2 msg) after-init:)
          #;(called once the main event loop executes.
             do initialization stuff here!))))
     (qt-exec))

Alternatively:
   (begin
     ; Let qt-exec send the message:
     (mp-add-default-handler
      (lambda (msg)
        (when (eqv? (@2 msg) after-init:)
          #;(called once the main event loop executes.
             do initialization stuff here!))))
     (qt-exec after-init:))

Alternatively:
   (begin
     (qt-exec (lambda () #;(called once the main event loop executes.))))


### (qt-hide _object_) - __procedure__

Calls QWidget::hide on _object_.


### (qt-line-edit-create _parent_ _size-list_) - __procedure__

Creates a line editor view with window size according to _size-list_.
It returns an object handle for further reference.
The handle needs to be destroyed using `(qt-delete)`

    (define line-edit (qt-line-edit-create [600, 300]))
    (qt-show line-edit)
    (qt-reg line-edit key-press:
     (lambda (key) (when (= ($name: key) 'q') (qt-delete line-edit))))


### (qt-line-edit-set-lines _line-edit-obj_ _list-of-lines_) - __procedure__

Sets the lines which the line editor should show.
The _list-of-lines_ is a list of line structures, which define how the
line is displayed. Each line is itself a list of following attributes:

    [
     _string-special-text_       - Text label on variable width left part.
     _bool-is-selected_          - Should be true, if the line is selected.
     _bool-is-highlighted-       - Should be true, if the line is highlighted.
     _string-special-text-right_ - Text label with fixed width to the right.
                                   Usabel for meta information.
                                   Width can be set with
                                   (qt-line-edit-set-meta-col-width)
     _string-special-text-left_  - The text in the left most padding area.
                                   Usable for displaying small icons/marks.
                                   Width can be set with
                                   (qt-line-edit-set-pad-col-width)
    ]

A _special-text_ can be just a simple text string, or list, that can contain
following values to control how it is displayed:

    _string_    - Will be the displayed text
    _number_    - A positive number sets the foreground color of the next text
                   A negative number sets the background color of the next text
    _list_      - A meta element, the first element defines the type.

Following meta elements are defined:

    [image: _image-index_]     - Displays an inline image, images can be loaded
                                 using (qt-line-edit-set-image).


### (qt-quit) - __procedure__

Exit the Qt event loop.


### (qt-resize _object_ [_w_ _h_]) - __procedure__

Calls QWidget::resize on _object_.

    (define q-wid (qt-splitter-create ...))
    (qt-resize q-wid [300 300])


### (qt-show _object_) - __procedure__

Calls QWidget::show on _object_.


### (qt-splitter-create _parent_ [_widgets_]) - __procedure__

Creates a splitter widget on the _parent_, for _widgets_.


sql
---

(import (rt sql))

### (sql-close _db-handle_) - __procedure__

Closes any open SQL statement.
If there is an error, an exception will be thrown.

For usage, see `sql-session`.


### (sql-destroy _db-handle_) - __procedure__

Destroys the database handle. Any further usage of it is an evil error!

For usage, see `sql-session`.


### (sql-execute! _db-handle_ _sql-data-struct_) - __procedure__

Returns a boolean whether there are any results to be fetched.
If it returns `#false` there are no results to be fetched. But the
statement was executed successfully.
If there is an error, an exception will be thrown.

   (let ((db (sql-session { #(...) }))
         (has-users (sql-execute! db ["SELECT * FROM users"])))
     (if has-users (display "got users!")
                   (display "no users?!")))


### (sql-next _db-handle_) - __procedure__

Advances the cursor to the next result row. Returning `#true` if a next
row is available. `#false` if no further row is available.
If there is an error, an exception will be thrown.

For usage, see `sql-session`.


### (sql-row _db-handle_) - __procedure__

Returns the columns of row as map, with the column names
in lowercase as keys.
If there is an error, an exception will be thrown.

For usage, see `sql-session`.


### (sql-session _options-data_) - __procedure__

Returns a database handle for making SQL-Queries.
If there is an error, an exception will be thrown.

    (let ((db (sql-session
               { :driver "sqlite3" :file ":memory:" }))
           (sql ["SELECT * FROM kunden"]))
      (do ((ok  (sql-execute! db sql) (sql-next db))
           (row (sql-row db) (sql-row db)))
          (ok (sql-close db))
        (display row))
      (sql-destroy db))

sys
---

(import (rt sys))

### (sys-exec! _mode-string-or-keyword_ _prog-path_ _arg-list_) - __procedure__

Starts the executable _prog-path_ with the arguments _arg-list_.
The _mode_ decides, what is returned. Currently only the `simple:` mode
is implemented. And it returns a data structure, that contains the exit code,
and the complete output of the stderr and stdout streams.
If an error occured, it will be logged and `exit-status` will be `nil`.

    (exec! simple: "./foo.exe" [])
    ;=> { exit-status: 0 stderr: "..." stdout: "..." }


### (sys-file-exists? _path-string_) - __procedure__

Returns `#true` if _path-string_ points to an existing file/directory.

    (sys-file-exists? "C:/Windows") ;=> #true
    (sys-file-exists? "C:/FoobarNotExists.txt") ;=> #false


### (sys-find _path-string_ _flags-string_ _regex-or-regex-list_) - __procedure__

This procedure searches (optionally recursively) through the directory at
_path-string_ and returns a list of filenames.
_flags-string_ may contain one of the following mode chars:
   "R"       - Search recursively.
   "i"       - Regex matching is done case insensitive.
   "d"       - Only directories.
   "D"       - Only non-directories.
   "f"       - Only regular files.
   "F"       - Anything but regular files.

   "a"       - Returns absolute paths.
   "c"       - Returns canonical paths.
   "r"       - Returns relative paths.
   "g"       - Returns generic path.
   "Y"       - Returns a structure containing status information about the file.
                 (Can be combined with a, c, r)
   "y"       - The info structure that is returned with 'Y' contains also the symlink_status.

_regex-or-regex-list_ may contain one or more regexes that the files may match.
Matching one is enough

   (sys-find "." "iR" "(.*)\.exe")

util
----

(import (rt util))

### (util-from-csv _csv-string_ _field-sep_ _row-sep_) - __procedure__

@util procedure (util-from-csv _csv-string_ _field-sep_)
@util procedure (util-from-csv _csv-string_)

Returns a table like data structure that contains the contents of
the CSV formatted _csv-string_.
_field-sep_ contains the field separator, usually something like `,` or `;` (default).
_row-sep_ contains the row/field set separator,
usually something like `"\r\n"` (default).

    (util-from-csv "a,b,c\r\nd,e,f" "," "\r\n")
    ;=> [["a","b","c"],["d","e","f"]]


### (util-from-json _string_) - __procedure__

Interpretes _string_ as UTF-8 encoded JSON.


### (util-from-utf8 _string_ _dest-encoding-name_) - __procedure__

Decodes the UTF8 _string_ into the _dest-encoding-name_
Returns the bytes of the result.
See also `util-to-utf8`.


### (util-match _strings_ _regexes_ _return-format-mode-str_) - __procedure__

Matches _strings_ using _regexes_. Can also be just a single string and
a single regex. Regex format is ECMAScript standard like C++11 uses it.

_strings_ may look like in these examples:
   _strings_ = _string_
   _strings_ = [_string_, ...]
   _strings_ = [[_string_, _replacement_], ...]
_regexes_ may look like in these examples:
   _regexes_ = _regex_
   _regexes_ = [_regex_, _flags_, _match-token_]
   _regexes_ = [[_regex_, _flags_, _match-token_], ...]
Where _flags_ and _match-token_ are optional.
_match-token_ contains some value, that is used to identify the regex that was
matched.
_flags_ may be one or multiple of:
   _flags_:
       "i"   - case insensitive match
       "o"   - optimize for matching fast
       "c"   - collate according to current locale
       "w"   - widestring match (for UTF-8 input).
       "k"   - keep first submatch (the string itself) in the output.
       "0"   - Regex Grammar: ECMAScript (default)
       "1"   - Regex Grammar: Extended POSIX
       "2"   - Regex Grammar: Awk POSIX
       "3"   - Regex Grammar: Grep POSIX
       "4"   - Regex Grammar: Egrep POSIX
       "5"   - Regex Grammar: Basic POSIX
       "6"   - Regex Grammar: Perl Regex syntax (only with boost::regex)
       "a"   - will match the whole string, instead of just a part of it
                 against the regex.
       "g"   - globally match the pattern multiple times.
                 (does not work with replacements.)
       "s"   - split up the string using this regex.
                 (does not work with replacements.)
_replacement_ may contain:
       $n      - backreference
       $&      - entire match
       $`      - prefix
       $      - suffix
_return-format-mode-str_ may contain:
       "n"   - string index-numbers

Examples:

  
; Searching for a match inside a string:
    (util-re "foobar" "(o+)")  ;=> "oo"
  
; Matching a complete string:
    (util-re "foobar" ["f(o+)bar" "a"]) ;=> "oo"
    ; or:
    (util-re "foobar" "^f(o+)bar$") ;=> "oo"
  
; Multiple sub-matches:
    (util-re "foobar" "(o+).*(a+)")  ;=> ("oo" "a")
  
; Global match:
    (util-re "foobarfoobfbffoooorer" ["f(o+)" "g"])  ;=> ("oo" "oo" "oooo")
    (util-re "foobarfoobfbffoooorer" ["(f(o+))" "g"])
    ;=> (("foo" "oo") ("foo" "oo") ("foooo" "oooo"))
  
; Split string:
    (util-re "foo, bar ,  baz,boo" ["\s*,\s*" "s"])  ;=> ("foo" "bar" "baz" "boo")


### (util-to-csv _data_ _field-sep_ _row-sep_) - __procedure__

@util procedure (util-to-csv _data_ _field-sep_)
@util procedure (util-to-csv _data_)

Serializes the table data structure _data_ as CSV.
_field-sep_ contains the field separator, usually something like `,` or `;` (default).
_row-sep_ contains the row/field set separator,
usually something like `"\r\n"` (default).

    (util-from-csv "a,b,c\r\nd,e,f" "," "\r\n")
    ;=> [["a","b","c"],["d","e","f"]]


### (util-to-json _data_) - __procedure__

Returns the _data_ structure as JSON and UTF-8 encoded string.


### (util-to-utf8 _string-or-bytes_ _source-encoding-name_) - __procedure__

Reencodes the character set of _string-or-bytes_ by interpreting it as
if it is encoded in _source-encoding-name_.
Returns an UTF8 encoded text string.

Possible _encoding-names_:
    - Latin1
    - ISO-8859-8
    - UTF-16
    - UTF-16BE
    - UTF-16LE
    - UTF-32
    - UTF-32BE
    - UTF-32LE
    - CP1250 / WINDOWS-1250
    - 850 / CP850
And many others that are supported by boost::local (iconv/icu)
