LAL Primitive and Syntax Reference Manual
=========================================

__LAL - Lua Lisp/Scheme Compiler__

For a syntax reference I recommend looking at the Scheme specification
document R7RS (small). LAL tries to be compatible to Scheme when it
is reasonably possible.
But bear in mind, that LAL can not provide the complete spectrum
of Scheme syntax and semantics. It is a Language that is compiled
to Lua and is not wrapped into an interpretation layer.
This basically means, you lose features such as `call-with-current-continuation`,
`dynamic-wind`.

Also with regard to procedures and libraries a look at the R7RS (small) reference
may prove valuable. In any case, this reference ought to be a comprehensive
handbook for developing LAL programs, and thus at least contains a declaration
of the procedure or syntax.

The goal of LAL is to provide the same performance trade offs that
Lua comes with. LAL tries hard to add as little runtime overhead as
possible and output reasonably efficient (and __human readable__) Lua code.

This manual is automatically generated from the compiler
and LAL library sources. I'm not that fond of automatically
generated documentation, but it should serve the purpose of
a reference manual due to example code coupling the descriptions.

Important Notes about the Lua Implementation
--------------------------------------------

There are a few notes to make about the way LAL is compiled to Lua.
All LAL lists are directly converted and represented as Lua tables.
This means, you basically work with Lua tables. While this has obvious
performance benefits compared to using tables only as `cons` pairs to
form a linked list. It also comes with all the warts that Lua tables
have. First and probably the biggest one is, that you can not put a `nil`
into the list. It will just make the list end at that index.
This is probably the ugliest wart. The LAL parser internally replaces
`nil` with some sentinel value, but once it left the compiler and is
transformed into Lua code, you will have the Lua `nil` in your hands.

Next, tables also act as associative maps, which sometimes leads to confusing
results. LAL tries to hide that fact, but you will probably still stumble upon
this fact down the road.

Symbols are represented as Lua strings. This is done because Lua internalizes all
strings, so that a string comparsion is essentially an integer comparsion.
LAL represents Symbols as Lua strings that start with the character `"\xFE;"`
character number `254`. And keywords start with `"\xFD;"` (`253`).
Bear this in mind, if you get surprising results from
procedures like `(write ...)`. It also means, that if you write
`(display "\xFE;foobar")` you will get a compiletime error, because LAL can't
find the symbol `foobar` (in case you didn't `define` it).

It is a bit painful and ugly, but bear in mind that LAL comes with clear benefits
on the performance side compared to a full blown interpreter implemented in Lua.
Such an interpreter would need to represent Scheme `cons` pairs and lists as linked
lists of thos pairs. That poses a big burden on the Lua garbage collector, and
handling those lists would be quite slow too. On top of that, interaction with
Lua code becomes difficult, as you would need to transform the linked
list into a Lua table first. And then you still have to worry about the `nil` holes.

License
-------

This source code is published under the MIT License. See lal.lua or LICENSE
file for the complete copyright notice.

LAL Values and Data Types
-------------------------

LAL is inspired by Clojures sequences and maps a bit when it comes to
syntactic aspects of the language. On the other side, with regard of available
primitives, special forms and procedures it is heavily oriented on Scheme R7RS.

These are the data types that LAL provides:

### Symbols

LAL knows two kinds of symbols.
First there are the regular ones, which are mostly Scheme compatible
with regard to the reader syntax:

    a-symbol
    another_symbol
    make-me!
    lol?!

But there is a special case: Lua also has __Keywords__, which
are basically symbols that are postfixed with a colon `:`:

    a-keyword:
    alsoone:
    also-a-keyword::

These always evaluate to themself. This makes it easy to use them
as keys in maps (see below).

### Integers (exact numbers)

LAL parses integer number like these:

    -1
    +1233
    392
    49

Thes are internall converted to a Lua integer using `math.tointeger`
which Lua 5.3 provides.

### Floating Point (inexact number)

LAL parses float numbers like these:

    -1.32
    0.334
    +493.232

These are internally converted to Lua numbers using `tonumber`.

### Strings

The string reader syntax is largely compatible with Scheme R7RS small:

    "foobar hexval: \x0a;\x0d;"
    "newlines and \"quotes\" like usual: \n and tabs: \t, and so on..."

However, there is an extension that allows multiline strings
in similar fashion that Chicken Scheme provides:

    (let ((x #<<BLAFOO
        This is a
        multiline
        String! 
    BLAFOO))
        x)
    ;=>"    This is a\n    multiline\n    String!"

There is also an interpolated version available, that is
transformed into a `(str ...)` expression:

    (define x 123)
    #<#FOOBAR
        This is just a string with a ##hashtag
        You can put calculated things in like 2 + 4 = #(+ 2 4)
        And also raw identifiers can be bound: ,,#{x},,
    FOOBAR

`#{...}` exists to directly insert identifiers, which would
also be possible using `#`, but it would eat up any other characters
allowed in an identifier. To insert an `#` you have to double it like `##`.

If you want to write strings with lots of backslashes in it, like
for a regular expression, you can use the special single quote
syntax:

    #q'\s+foobar\s+'    ;=> "\\s+foobar\\s+"

If you want to embed the single quote use a double single quote:

    #q''''    ;=> "'"

### Lists

Lists can be written in multiple forms:

    (list 1 2 3)
    '(1 2 3)
    [1 2 3]         ; Clojure inspired syntax
                    ; syntactic sugar for: (list 1 2 3)

### Associative Maps

These are inspired a bit by Clojure and are internally represented
using Lua tables:

    { a: 10 b: 20 }
    { 'a 10 'b 20 }
    ; both maps will have the 'a' and 'b' keys set.

Symbols in a map definition are converted and stripped off their prefixes
and put as strings into the Lua table. This is makes interaction with Lua
code easier. Note that also the colon `:` of the keywords are stripped
off.
